The scholars of biography and history have disagreed about the exact date of the Prophet’s birth, but they unanimously agreed that he was born on a
Monday during the Year of The Elephant. Ibn al-Qayyim said, “there is no difference of opinion on the fact that he was born in the middle of Makkah and that it was during the Year of the Elephant.” On the authority of Ibn ‘Abbaas, may Allah be well pleased with him and his father: “The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was born during the Year of the Elephant. “This is a fact that none of the scholars disagree upon. Khaleefah ibn Khayyaat, Ibn al-Jazzaar, Ibn Dihiyyah, and Ibn al-Jawzee all report that there is a consensus (on this fact). As for his birth on a Monday, it has been reported on the authority of Abee Qataadah al-Ansaaree, may Allah be well pleased with him, that: “He ﷺ was asked about fasting on Mondays, and he responded: “that is the day on which I was born, the day on which I was sent on my mission as a Messenger-or the first day on which I received revelation.” Ibn Katheer said: “those who claim that he was born on a Friday, the 17th of Rabee’ al-Awwaal, have greatly erred.”
The point of disagreement has been on the exact month and its exact day. Ibn Ishaaq has narrated on the authority of several of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ that they said to him: “O Messenger of Allah! tell us about yourself.” He ﷺ then responded: “I am the prayer of my father [Prophet] Ibraaheem, and the glad tidings from Jesus. When my mother gave birth to me, she saw there was light protruding from her which illuminated the palaces of Al-Shaam.” Al-Albaanee has said: “the chain of narrators for that report is very good and strong.”
His birth ﷺ was after the death of his father Abdullah and while he was still in the womb of his mother, and so the Prophet ﷺ grew-up as an orphan. Furthermore, his birth was in the house of Abee Taalib in the district of Banee Haashim.
On the authority of Anas ibn Maalik, it is reported that “Jibreel came to the Messenger of Allah ﷺ while he was playing with the other little boys, and he put him on the ground and then proceeded to split open his chest near his heart. He then took out his heart and removed from it a small piece of flesh. Jibreel then said: “this is what Satan would have used to get a hold of you (i.e., Allah removed from any possibility that he could ever be influenced by the devil in any way shape or form).” Then he washed (the heart) in a small bowl made of gold and with Zamzam water. Then he placed the heart back, stitched him and placed him back where he was playing. The other boys had run back to their mother-who was his wet nurse-and said to her: “Muhammad has been killed!” When he came back to them, his face and skin were pale.” Anas then said: “I remember seeing the scars of the stiches on his chest.”
When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ reached the age of 6, his mother the noblewoman Aaminah bint Wahb took him to visit his maternal uncles from the Banee ‘Addee ibn al-Najjaar. With him was his wetnurse, Umm Ayman, may Allah be well pleased with her, and they were riding on two different she-camels. His mother alighted with him within the territory of the tribe of al-Naabighah, near where his father-Abdullah ibn ‘Abd’ul-Muttalib was buried.
She stayed there with her maternal uncles for a month, then she returned with him to Makkah. While they were on their journey back, his mother ﷺ passed away and Umm Ayman (whose name was Barakah bint Tha’labah ibn Hisn) was the one who completed the journey back to Makkah with him ﷺ. Umm Ayman loved the Prophet ﷺ very much and should took extremely good care of him. She enveloped him in her love and protection. In return, the Prophet ﷺ showed the utmost loyalty and reverence, and was extremely gracious to her. When the Prophet ﷺ grew older, he set her free. Then Zayd ibn Haarithah married her, may Allah be well pleased with him; she gave birth to Usaamah ibn Zayd, may Allah be well pleased with her and him.
Umm Ayman, may Allah be well pleased with her, passed away five months after the death of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ.
When the mother of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ the noblewoman, Aaminah bint Wahb, passed away, at the age of six, he was passed into the care of his grandfather Abdul-Mutallab ibn Haashim. He was a noble and honorable man amongst his people. Quraysh had nicknamed him “al-Fadl” because of how forgiving and graceful he was. He was appointed responsibility of feeding and protecting the pilgrims to Makkah after the death of his father, Haashim ibn Abd Manaaf. ‘Abdul-Muttalib loved his grandson, Muhammad, very dearly, and preferred him over all of his other children. He showed more compassion to him than to his own sons.
Ibn Ishaaq has said: “The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was with his grandfather, Abdul-Mutallab ibn Haashim after the death of his mother, Aaminah bint Wahb. He used to place a mattress in the shade of the Ka’bah. His sons would sit around it and would wait for him to come out to them. No one would sit on it out of their reverence for him. The Messenger of Allah ﷺ would come out when he was a young boy who was healthy and strong, and he would sit on his grandfather’s mattress, but his uncles would grab the tails of his turban and yank it to stop him from doing so. If Abdul-Mutallab saw that he would say: “leave my son, for by Allah he has a great matter in his future.” He would then let him sit with him on his mattress, he would stroke his back with his hand and would be pleased with whatever he did.”
Abdul-Mutallab would never eat except that he would say: “My son!” And he would then give him to eat. When death was upon him, he counseled Aboo Taalib to take care of the Messenger of Allah ﷺ and to protect him.
When Messenger of Allah ﷺ reached eight years old, his grandfather passed away, and he was entrusted into the care of his uncle Aboo Taalib (the son of ‘Abdul-Muttalib). He was advised to take care of him and to protect him. The Prophet’s father ﷺ Abdullah, and Aboo Taalib, were from the same mother and therefore when Abdul-Mutallab passed away, responsibility for the Prophet ﷺ passed on to Aboo Taalib.
Ibn Sa’d and Ibn ‘Asaakir both related on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbaas, may Allah be well pleased with them both, as well others that they said: “when Abdul-Muttalib passed away, Aboo Taalib took the Messenger of Allah ﷺ so that he may be with him. Aboo Taalib loved him very dearly, more than any of his sons; he would only sleep when the Prophet ﷺ was by his side; and he made sure that he had food set aside for him, ﷺ. When the sons of Aboo Taalib would eat together or on their own, they made sure to never get completely full; and if the Messenger of Allah ﷺ ate with them, then they would eat until they had their fill. Whenever Aboo Taalib wanted to give them lunch or dinner he would say to them: “not until my son has arrived.” Then the Messenger of Allah ﷺ would come and they would sit and Aboo Taalib would give him from their food. If the Prophet ﷺ was not there he would not allow them to get full.
If there was milk, it was given to the children in a large drinking-bowl, and the Prophet ﷺ would drink first, then the other children would all drink from the same one, one after another (and be full). But if they drank by themselves (without the Prophet ﷺ) one bowl would never suffice. And Aboo Taalib would exclaim: “verily you are blessed!”
When the Prophet ﷺ completed his twelfth year, his uncle, Aboo Taalib, took him on a trip to Al-Shaam for trade. When the caravan alighted at Busra, they passed by a monk there by the name of Baheera; he was extremely well versed in the Gospel and Christianity as a whole. When Baheera saw the Prophet ﷺ he began to observe him and speak to him. Then he turned to Aboo Taalib and said to him: “Is this boy yours?” He responded: “He is my son.” Aboo Taalib would call him his son because of his deep love for him and because of how much he cared for him). Baheera then said: “This cannot be your son; it is not possible that this boy’s father still be alive.” Aboo Taalib then confessed that he was his brother’s son, to which Baheera then said: “What happened to his father then?” Aboo Taalib then said: “He died when his mother was still pregnant with him.” Baheera then replied: “That’s right…go back with him to his country and keep him away from the Jews. I swear by Allah, that if they were to see him (and realize who he is, they will plot evil against him. That his boy is your brother’s son is a mighty thing indeed.” Aboo Taalib then hastily returned to Makkah.
When the Messenger of Allah ﷺ was about 14 or 15 years of age, the war of al-Fijaar (The Sacrilegious War), occurred between Quraysh, its allies from amongst the tribes of Kinaanah, against the tribe of Banoo Qays ‘Aylaan. This incident is counted amongst the most momentous moments in Arab history (Ayyaam al-Arab).
The incident that sparked it was when ‘Urwaah al-Rahhaal ibn ‘Utbah ibn Rabee’a rented to al-Nu’maan ibn al-Mundhir a special container to use so that he could conduct some business buying and selling musk and similar products. So, al-Baraad ibn Qays (a member of the tribe of Banoo Damrah ibn Bakr ibn Abd Manaah ibn Kinaanah), said to him, “do you dare conduct business with other than the sons of Kinaanah?!?!” And he responded: “yes! And Everyone else!”
Then Urwah ibn al-Rahhaal exited the marketplace, and so did al-Baraad, who was then waiting for ‘Urwah to be distracted; such that when he was in the highest point of Tayman Dhee Zhilaal, ‘Urwah then became distracted. So, al-Barradh then ambushed and killed him in one of the sacred months; therefore, it became known as “The Sacrilegious War” due to committing a forbidden act in the Sacred Month.
Someone later came to Quraysh and said: “Al-Barraad has killed ‘Urwah in the marketplace at ‘Ukaazh during one of the sacred months. Upon hearing the news, they departed while the tribe of Banoo Hawwaazin had not realized it. Then the news had reached the tribe of Banoo Hawwaazin, and so they followed them until they caught up with them before they were able to reach the Haram, so they fought until night fell upon them. However, as they entered the Haram, the tribe of Banoo Hawaazin ceased fighting. Then the tribes met for several days after that, each tribe fighting with its allies. Every tribe from Quraysh and Kinaanah had someone leading them and likewise for the tribe of Banoo Qays.
The Messenger of Allah ﷺ witnessed some of the occurrences of this war, which was the Day of the Palm Tree (Yawm al-Nakhlah). He was 14 years old, while other reports say that he was 20, ﷺ.
After the tribes left, in Dhu’l-Qi’dah, there took place the Oath of the Righteous (Hilf al-Fudool) in which Quraysh swore that they would always help the oppressed. It took place after a man from Zabeed from the people of Yemen sold a product to a man from al-‘Aas ibn Waa’il al-Sahmee, but who was always being told that he would be paid later every time he asked to be paid. Aboo Qubays then stood on high ground and yelled out exclaiming the injustice that was committed to him. Then Quraysh swore their oath upheld justice; the Prophet ﷺ was present at the swearing of that oath.
The Oath of the Righteous took place in one of the four sacred months of the Arab calendar. The various tribes of Quraysh were united around it: Banoo Haashim, Banoo Al-Muttalib, Asad ibn ‘Abd’ul-‘Uzzah ibn Kilaab, and Taym ibn Murrah. They gathered at the house of ‘Abdullah ibn Jud’aan al-Taymee because of his maturity and nobility. And so, they all swore and agreed that there would not be a single person ever oppressed in all of Makkah except that they would stand with them; and that they would fight against the oppressor until they returned what they had wrongfully taken.
The Messenger of Allah ﷺ was present at this oath and he said regarding it: “Verily I have witnessed in the house of Abdullah ibn Jud’aan, an oath that is more beloved to me than red she-camels. Were I to be called upon to fulfill that oath in Islam, I would not hesitate!” The very spirit of this oath negates the fanaticism of the time of Jaahiliyyah in which was overtaken by the spirit of excessive zeal for one’s clan and tribe.
It has been said that the cause of this oath that a man from Banoo Zubayd arrived in Makkah with his goods for sale. Al-‘Aas ibn Waa’il al-Sahmee then purchased them from him, however, he did not pay him for them. He then appealed for assistance from his allies from amongst the Banoo Abd’l-Daar, Banoo Makhzoom, Banoo Jumah, Banoo Sahm, and the Banoo ‘Adee, but none of them did much to help him.
The man from the Banoo Zubayd then climbed a mountain and began calling out to people, and exclaiming, reciting poetry that described his plight. Hearing this, al-Zubayr ibn al-Muttalib agreed with it and and then said this man has no one to protect him.” Everyone gathered and agreed to the oath that came to be known as the Oath of the Righteous (Hilf al-Fudool). Then they all stood and went to al-‘Aas ibn Waa’il and took from him the right of the man from Zubayd.
The reason it came to be known as the Oath of the Righteous is because three men from the tribe of Jurhu: al-Fadl ibn Fadaalah, Fadl ibn Wadaa’ah, and Fadl ibn al-Haarith had all previously agreed to this sort of oath before. When the oath that was being agreed upon by Quraysh began to resemble the oath of those three men from Jurhum, it took of the name of The Oath of al-Fudool.
The scholars have disagreed about the age of the Prophet ﷺ and the age of Khadeeja, may Allah be well pleased with her, when they married. Some have said that he was 25, others that he was 27, others that he was 30, while others that he was older. As for the age of Khadeejah, the scholars have equally disagreed and said that she was between the ages of 35 and 40; while others have maintained that she was older. It has been narrated that when Khadeejah, may Allah be well pleased with her, had heard about the Prophet’s trustworthiness and noble character traits ﷺ her sister hired him and his partner (to conduct business for her). When they had completed their trip, he still had to pay them. His partner then began to demand payment and he said to the Prophet Muhammad ﷺ “Go, (and ask for payment).” But he responded: “No, you go, I am too shy to go.” Her sister said to his partner once: “Where is Muhammad? Why didn’t he come with you?” His partner responded to her: “I had told him to come but he claimed that he was too ashamed to do so.”
Khadeejah’s sister then mentioned all of this to her, and she said: “I have never seen a man with more respect and timidity, nor more virtue, nor more than Muhammad, ﷺ. As a result of this description, Khadeejah then began to feel something for him ﷺ,. So, she had someone sent to him (the messenger) to tell him: “go and speak to my father and ask him for my hand in marriage.” (The Prophet, ﷺ), then responded: “your father is a wealthy man, he would never agree…”. (The messenger) then relayed to him: “go and meet him, and speak to him, I will take care of everything else.” The Prophet ﷺ eventually married her, and she was a widow.
